\begin{abstract}

The promise of automatic parallelization, freeing programmers from the
error-prone and time-consuming process of making efficient use of
parallel processing resources, remains unrealized.  For decades, the
imprecision of memory analysis limited the applicability of
non-speculative automatic parallelization techniques.  The
introduction of speculation overcame these applicability limitations,
but, even in the case of no mispeculation, speculative techniques
exhibited high communication and bookkeeping costs for validation and
commit.  This paper presents Per{\em{spec}}tive, a speculative-DOALL
parallelization framework that maintains the applicability of
speculative techniques while approaching the efficiency of
non-speculative ones.  Unlike current approaches where memory analysis
and speculative assumptions are unaware of each other and are used
independently, Per{\em{spec}}tive includes a novel speculation-aware
memory analysis whose results can be used to infer properties
essential for efficient parallelization.  Per{\em{spec}}tive
demonstrates higher overall program speedup (23.0$\times$ for 12
general-purpose C/C++ programs running on a 28-core shared-memory
machine) than Privateer (11.5$\times$), the best prior
speculative-DOALL parallelization system, by reducing speculative
parallelization overheads in ways not possible with prior
parallelization systems.  \end{abstract}
